add environments tutorial (#1703)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/advanced/gitops/environments/index.md

            namespace: org-${organization}
            priority: 120
    target:
      group: application.giantswarm.io
      kind: App
      name: ${cluster_name}
      namespace: org-${organization}
kind: Kustomization
```

```yaml
controlPlane:
  availabilityZones:
    - eu-central-1
    - eu-central-2
    - eu-central-3
nodeCIDR: "10.32.0.0/24"
```
__Note__: These values are examples and need to be replaced by real values of the user account.

The kustomize plugin in Flux will create the new Config Map with the region values. Note that priority is set to `120` which will precede over the stage values.

In case we have other region, for example `us-west`, we can create a `cluster_config.yaml` file with the different configuration. 

```yaml
controlPlane:
  availabilityZones:
    - us-west-1
    - us-west-2
nodeCIDR: "10.64.0.0/24"
```

The folder structure resulting from this is:

```nohighlight
bases/environments/regions
├── eu-central
│   ├── cluster_config.yaml
│   └── kustomization.yaml
└── us_west
    ├── cluster_config.yaml
    └── kustomization.yaml
```

## Add Workload Clusters based on the environment cluster templates

> Now, we are using the environments created as a base for a workload cluster. In order to create a workload cluster in our repository we run the command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After having learnt how to create our own environment templates, lets create a cluster based one those. First, we need to get the cluster App custom resource running this command:
```

```nohighlight
kubectl gs gitops add workload-cluster \
--management-cluster MC_NAME \
--name WL_NAME \
--organization ORG_NAME \
--repository-name MC_NAME-git-repo \
--base bases/environments/stages/dev \
--cluster-release 0.21.0 \
--default-apps-release 0.15.0
```

> In this case, we have specified to use the `dev` stage we just created as a base. This will generate all the folders and files needed to create the cluster with the default settings of that stage.
> 
> In order to include now the `region` setting, we need to edit the file `/management-clusters/MC_NAME/organizations/ORG_NAME/workload-clusters/WL_NAME/mapi/cluster/kustomization.yaml` and include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, we have decided to use the `development` stage template. [We have already explained where to define your workload resources](https://docs.giantswarm.io/advanced/gitops/manage-workload-clusters/#creating-your-repo-structure), now we just need to tweak the `kustomization.yaml` on `/management-clusters/MC_NAME/organizations/ORG_NAME/workload-clusters/WC_NAME/mapi/cluster/` to include `region` and `stage` template references:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
commonLabels:
  giantswarm.io/managed-by: flux
kind: Kustomization
resources:
  - ../../../../../../../../bases/environments/stages/dev
# Include a new line with the resources that provide region configuration
  - ../../../../../../../../bases/environments/regions/eu-central
```

__Note__:  We use the extra configs feature of App CR to patch in additional layers of configurations for out Application.
You can read more about this feature [here](https://docs.giantswarm.io/app-platform/app-configuration/#extra-configs).

## Tips for developing environments

> For complex clusters, you can end up merging a lot of layers of templates and configurations. In order to keep sanity, it's very important to establish a good priority system and respect it every time.
> 
> For example, reserve priority values for different levels:
> 
> - 100 for cluster base
> - 110 for environment stage
> - 120 for environment region
> - 130 for cluster config
> 
> You can check the [gitops-template](https://github.com/giantswarm/gitops-template/tree/main/) repository which contains several examples of cluster bases and configuration layers. Under the `tools` folder in this repository, you can find the `fake-flux-build` script that helps you render and inspect the final result. For more information check `tools/README.md`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For complex clusters, you can end up merging a lot of layers of templates and configurations. In order to keep sanity, it's very important to establish a good priority system and respect it every time. As an example, reserve priority values for different levels:

- 100 for cluster base
- 110 for stage environment 
- 120 for the regional environment 
- 130 for specific cluster config

We have published [gitops-template](https://github.com/giantswarm/gitops-template/tree/main/) repository which contains several examples of cluster bases and configuration layers. 

Furtherlly, you can find some helpers in the`tools` folder. For example, we have developed `fake-flux-build` scrip to render and inspect the final resources merging all values. For more information check `tools/README.md`.
```

---
linkTitle: Creating environments for GitOps
title: Creating environments for GitOps resources
description: How to deploy resources, with different configurations or versions across several environments.
weight: 70
menu:
  main:
    parent: advanced-gitops
    identifier: advanced-gitops-environments
user_questions:
  - How can I manage different environments with GitOps?
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-honeybadger
last_review_date: 2023-02-10
---

> # Add Workload Cluster environments

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
It is automatically added

> You might want to set up multiple, similar Workload Clusters that serve as for example development, staging and production environments. You can utilize `bases` to achieve that. Let's take a look at the `/bases/environments` folder structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On many occasions, you need to set good defaults for your Workload Clusters but have the ability to change some values depending on the type of environment: development, staging or production for example. In such a case, you can rely on specific `bases` defined on your GitOps repository.  Let's see in this document how you can create a `/bases/environments` folder structure.
```

## General note

It is possible to solve the environment propagation problem in multiple ways, notably by:

- using a multi-directory structure, where each environment is represented as a directory in a `main` branch of a single
  repository
- using a multi-branch approach, where each branch corresponds to one environment, but they are in the same repo
- using a multi-repo setup, where there's one root repository providing all the necessary templates, and then there is another repository per environment.

Each of these approaches has pros and cons. Giant Swarm relies on the multi-directory approach for multiple reasons. It is a single repo and single branch which serves as the source of truth for all the environments. Easy for template sharing and a relatively simple way to compare and promote configuration across environments. On the other hand, it needs extra work for access control management, template versioning or environment drift detection.

> ## Environments

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Environments types
```

> We are creating a new `base` type called environment. Inside there will be two folders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many ways to separete your cluster configuration but over the years we have seen in most cases there are two main factors: stages and regions. You can always adapt further this to your own requirements following the same principles described below.

Lets start creating a new folder in our `bases` root directory. We will call it `environments and we will add two new folders `stages` and `regions`.
```

The `stages` folder is how we propose to group environment specifications. There is a good reason for this additional layer. You can use it for having multiple different clusters - like the dev, staging and production - but also to have multiple different regions where you want to spin these clusters up.

The `regions` folder is how we propose to group specifications for configurations referred to different locations or regions in the different cloud providers or datacenters.

> __Note__: If you want to use multiple environment templates to create a single cluster that uses `App CR`s for deployments, for example, you would like to use `dev` layout to set app configuration and then use `east` from the `data-centers` to set the IP ranges, you might run into issues around merging configurations, as currently one configuration source (i.e. `ConfigMap` in `spec.config.configMap`) completely overrides the whole value of the same attribute coming from the other base. We're working to remove this limitation. This means for example that setting `machinePools` in several files will result on selecting only the full block of the file with higher priority.

Reviewer: I dont think this is true any more. I setup different values in machine pools in default base, region and stage, and it preserves the values

Author: let's remove the note

> In order to avoid config collisions, we are specifying different config changes in different environment folders. In our case:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to avoid possible collisions in the configuration, we define the different changes in the configuration across several environment folders. In our case:
```

- `stages` should refer to versions of the cluster and apps running, and different configurations associated to the stage.
- `regions` should contain configurations referred to the locality, like networking or DNS zones.

> We're assuming that all the clusters using this environments pattern should in many regards look the same across all the environments. Still, each environment layer introduces some key differences, like the app version being deployed for `dev/staging/prod` environments or a specific IP range, availability zones, certificates or ingress config for regions like `eu-central/us-west`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are assuming all the clusters following this environment's pattern should look similar across all the environments. Even so, each layer introduces some key differences, like the app version being deployed for `dev/staging/prod` environments or a specific IP range.
```

> To create an environment template, you need to make a  directory in `environments` that describes the best the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to create a new environment template, you need to make a directory in `environments` that describes the best differentiating factor for that kind of environment. Then, you create a subfolder with different values inside.
```

> differentiating factor for that kind of environment, then you should create a sub folder there for different possible values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> For example, for multiple regions, we recommend putting region-specific configurations into
> `/bases/environments/regions` folder and under there create e.g. `eu_central`, and `us_west` folders.
> 
> Once your environment templates are ready, you can use them to create new clusters by placing cluster definitions
> in `/management-clusters/MC_NAME/organizations/ORG_NAME/workload-clusters`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, in the case of multiple regions, we recommend putting region-specific configurations into `/bases/environments/regions` directory in specific folders (e.g. `eu_central`, and `us_west`).

Once your environment templates are ready, you can create new clusters by placing the definitions in `/management-clusters/MC_NAME/organizations/ORG_NAME/workload-clusters` and referencing the template as we will see below.
```

Reviewer: Here I missing as example as we do with stages

Reviewer: ok I see `regions` are below stages, so all good

### Stages

> Let's create 2 example type of clusters under `/bases/environments/stages`. Each of these contain a `example_cluster` folder with an example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's see how to put the explanation into practice. We create two cluster stage templates under `/bases/environments/stages`. 
```
IMO we don't need extra `example_cluster` folder, and it makes things harder. What if we discard it?

```nohighlight

> mkdir -p bases/environments/stages/dev/example_cluster
> mkdir -p bases/environments/stages/prod/example_cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mkdir -p bases/environments/stages/dev
mkdir -p bases/environments/stages/prod
```

```

> Inside each folder, we will create a `kustomization.yaml` file. This file will reference an already existent `base` to get the cluster creation resources and then add some extra configurations or resources that will conform to the cluster template for the environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each stage, we create a `kustomization.yaml` file. This file has a reference to the `base` template. Our goal is just to overwrite or add the values specific to this stage.
```

Let's see how to create these files for the different environments.

#### The development cluster

> Let's create the `kustomization.yaml` file for the development cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the development `kustomization.yaml` file for the development cluster you find three main sections. First, the block generates the Config Maps with the development configuration values. The second one is the patch structure adding a reference to these Config Maps in the cluster app customer resource. Finally the reference to the `base` template where defaults for a cluster live.
```

buildMetadata: [originAnnotations]
configMapGenerator:
  - files:
    - values=cluster_config.yaml
    name: ${cluster_name}-dev-config
    namespace: org-${organization}
  - files:
    - values=default_apps_config.yaml
    name: ${cluster_name}-default-apps-dev-config
    namespace: org-${organization}
generatorOptions:
  disableNameSuffixHash: true
kind: Kustomization
patches:
  - patch: |
      - type: merge
        op: add
        path: /spec/extraConfigs/0
        value:
          name: ${cluster_name}-dev-config
          namespace: org-${organization}
          priority: 110
    target:
      group: application.giantswarm.io
      kind: App
      name: ${cluster_name}
      namespace: org-\${organization}
  - patch: |
      - type: merge
        op: add
        path: /spec/extraConfigs/0
        value:
          name: ${cluster_name}-default-apps-dev-config
          namespace: org-${organization}
          priority: 110
    target:
      group: application.giantswarm.io
      kind: App
      name: ${cluster_name}-defaul-apps
      namespace: org-\${organization}
resources:
  - ../../../../../../../../bases/clusters/capa/template/
```

> In addition, we are creating a configuration file `cluster_config.yaml` with the values we are changing from the cluster base:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next to the kustomization, we are creating the development configuration for the cluster. We call it `cluster_config.yaml`. It only contains the values specific for this stage:
```

```yaml
controlPlane:
  replicas: 1
machinePools:
- instanceType: m5.large
  maxSize: 5
  minSize: 3
  name: machine-dev-pool0
  rootVolumeSizeGB: 100
network:
  availabilityZoneUsageLimit: 1
```

> We want to set a specific version for some default apps installed in the cluster too, so we create a file `default_apps_config.yaml` with the specific values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we do the same for the defaults app configuration creating the file `default_apps_config.yaml`:
```

```yaml
userConfig:
  apps:
    cilium:
      version: 0.6.1
    coreDNS:
      version: 1.13.0
```

The final structure of this folder would be:

```nohighlight

> bases/environments/stages/dev
> └── example_cluster
>     ├── cluster_config.yaml
>     ├── default_apps_config.yaml
>     └── kustomization.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bases/environments/stages/dev
└── cluster_config.yaml
└── default_apps_config.yaml
└── kustomization.yaml
```

```

And pretty much that is it for the development cluster. Let's look at the production cluster next, created with minor differences.

#### The production cluster

> Let's create the `Kustomization` for the production cluster environment template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are creating the same structure as the development one but with some different values for the cluster and default apps:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
buildMetadata: [originAnnotations]
configMapGenerator:
  - files:
    - values=cluster_config.yaml
    name: ${cluster_name}-prod-config
    namespace: org-${organization}
  - files:
    - values=default_apps_config.yaml
    name: ${cluster_name}-default-apps-prod-config
    namespace: org-${organization}
generatorOptions:
  disableNameSuffixHash: true
kind: Kustomization
patches:
  - patch: |
      - type: merge
        op: add
        path: /spec/extraConfigs/0
        value:
          name: ${cluster_name}-prod-config
          namespace: org-${organization}
          priority: 110
    target:
      group: application.giantswarm.io
      kind: App
      name: ${cluster_name}
      namespace: org-\${organization}
  - patch: |
      - type: merge
        op: add
        path: /spec/extraConfigs/0
        value:
          name: ${cluster_name}-default-apps-prod-config
          namespace: org-${organization}
          priority: 110
    target:
      group: application.giantswarm.io
      kind: App
      name: ${cluster_name}-defaul-apps
      namespace: org-\${organization}
resources:

>   - ../../../../../../../../bases/clusters/capa/v0.21.0/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - ../../../../../../../../bases/clusters/capa
```
I would like to preserve same template and not make it complex 🙏

Author: this is not correct with versioning. You need to specify "capa/template" or "capa/v0xxx" in order to use one of them.

Reviewer: yeah then I would vote for just template and not overcomplicate in this example

Reviewer: BTW fixed

```

> In this case, we are setting the version of the base that we are using. See how to create versioned bases in the ["How to create bases" article](/advanced/gitops/bases/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
__Warning__: for the sake of simplicity we are referencing the same base template, but in some occasions where there are breaking changes you might need to link a different template. ["You can check complex scenarios here" article](/advanced/gitops/bases/).
```

Now, we are creating a configuration file `cluster_config.yaml` with the values we are changing from the cluster base for production. We can configure a completely different value set, even override new configurations from default.

```yaml
controlPlane:
  replicas: 3
machinePools:
- instanceType: m5.2xlarge
  maxSize: 10
  minSize: 5
  name: machine-prod-pool0
  rootVolumeSizeGB: 300
network:
  availabilityZoneUsageLimit: 3
```

We want now to set a different version for some default apps installed in the cluster (for example, we want to use a known stable version). Like in the dev environment, we create a file `default_apps_config.yaml` with the specific values.

```yaml
userConfig:
  apps:
    cilium:
      version: 0.6.0
    coreDNS:
      version: 1.12.0
```

It is similar to the development cluster in the following manners:

- We are using a base and modifying values with an overlay configuration.
- We can change values in the cluster config and in the default apps.

The final structure of our stages is:

```nohighlight

> bases/environments/stages/
> ├── dev
> │   └── example_cluster
> │       ├── cluster_config.yaml
> │       ├── default_apps_config.yaml
> │       └── kustomization.yaml
> └── prod
>     └── example_cluster
>         ├── cluster_config.yaml
>         ├── default_apps_config.yaml
>         └── kustomization.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bases/environments/stages/
├── dev
│       ├── cluster_config.yaml
│       ├── default_apps_config.yaml
│       └── kustomization.yaml
└── prod
        ├── cluster_config.yaml
        ├── default_apps_config.yaml
        └── kustomization.yaml
```

```

> __Note__: In a similar way, we can base our stages on different cluster templates that we create from bases. We can create as many levels as we want, always keeping in mind properly setting the priorities of the config files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
__Note__: In a similar way, we can base our stages on different cluster templates that we create from bases. We can create as many levels as we want, but take into account always to set the right priorities of the config files.
```

#### Region specific settings for the production cluster

> Let's create some bases for our region setup. Relative to root of the repository let's execute the following commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following the same structure as stage environments, we create a new folder `regions` under the `environments` bases directory.
```

```nohighlight
mkdir -p bases/environments/regions/eu_central
mkdir -p bases/environments/regions/us_west

cd bases/environments/regions
```

> For the `eu-central` region, we are creating a `cluster_config.yaml` file and a `kustomization.yaml` file. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's say we want to define a `eu-central` region where we describe some specifics related to that zone. For that, we create a `kustomization.yaml` file and `cluster_config.yaml` file same as we did with stages.
```

generatorOptions:
  disableNameSuffixHash: true
patches:
  - patch: |
      - op: add
        path: /spec/extraConfigs/0
        value:
          - name: "${cluster_name}-region-config"
            namespace: org-${organization}
            priority: 120
    target:
      group: application.giantswarm.io
      kind: App
      name: ${cluster_name}
      namespace: org-${organization}
kind: Kustomization
```

With these files, we are creating a new `configmap` and adding it as an extra config in the cluster app that will create the cluster resources.

Now, for the `us-west` region we create a `cluster_config.yaml` file with a different configuration. We can copy the `kustomization.yaml` file from the other region as it will be the same.

`cluster_config.yaml`

```yaml
controlPlane:
  availabilityZones:
    - us-west-1
    - us-west-2
nodeCIDR: "10.64.0.0/24"
```

We can use these as a second layer of configuration for our different clysers clusters.

The folder structure resulting from this is:

```nohighlight
bases/environments/regions
├── eu-central
│   ├── cluster_config.yaml
│   └── kustomization.yaml
└── us_west
    ├── cluster_config.yaml
    └── kustomization.yaml
```

> ## Add Workload Clusters based on the environment cluster templates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Use environment templates for your Workload Clusters 
```

Now, we are using the environments created as a base for a workload cluster. In order to create a workload cluster in our repository we run the command:

```nohighlight
kubectl gs gitops add workload-cluster \
--management-cluster MC_NAME \
--name WL_NAME \
--organization ORG_NAME \
--repository-name MC_NAME-git-repo \
--base bases/environments/stages/dev \
--cluster-release 0.21.0 \
--default-apps-release 0.15.0
```

In this case, we have specified to use the `dev` stage we just created as a base. This will generate all the folders and files needed to create the cluster with the default settings of that stage.

In order to include now the `region` setting, we need to edit the file `/management-clusters/MC_NAME/organizations/ORG_NAME/workload-clusters/WL_NAME/mapi/cluster/kustomization.yaml` and include:

```yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
commonLabels:
  giantswarm.io/managed-by: flux
kind: Kustomization
resources:
  - ../../../../../../../../bases/environments/stages/dev
# Include a new line with the resources that provide region configuration
  - ../../../../../../../../bases/environments/regions/eu-central
```

> __Note__:  We use the extra configs feature of App CR to patch in additional layers of configurations for out Application.
> You can read more about this feature [here](https://docs.giantswarm.io/app-platform/app-configuration/#extra-configs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
__Note__:  We use the 'extra configs` feature of App CR to patch additional layers of configurations for our Application. You can read more about this feature [here](https://docs.giantswarm.io/app-platform/app-configuration/#extra-configs).
```

---
linkTitle: Creating environments for GitOps
title: Creating environments for GitOps resources

> description: How to create different environments to deploy different resources, configurations or versions in different stages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: How to create different environments to deploy resources, configurations or versions in across several stages.
```

weight: 70
menu:
  main:
    parent: advanced-gitops
    identifier: advanced-gitops-environments
user_questions:

>   - How can I create an environment for gitops resources?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - How can I manage different environments with GitOps?
```

owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-honeybadger
last_review_date: 2023-02-10
---

# Add Workload Cluster environments

> You might want to set up multiple, similar Workload Clusters that serve as for example development,
> staging and production environments. You can utilize `bases` to achieve that. Let's take a look at the
> `/bases/environments` folder structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You might want to set up multiple, similar Workload Clusters that serve as for example development, staging and production environments. You can utilize `bases` to achieve that. Let's take a look at the `/bases/environments` folder structure.
```

## General note

> It is possible to solve the environment and environment propagation problem in multiple ways, notably by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to solve the environment propagation problem in multiple ways, notably by:
```

- using a multi-directory structure, where each environment is represented as a directory in a `main` branch of a single
  repository
- using a multi-branch approach, where each branch corresponds to one environment, but they are in the same repo

> - using a multi-repo setup, where there's one root repository providing all the necessary templates, then there is one another

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- using a multi-repo setup, where there's one root repository providing all the necessary templates, and then there is one another
```

>   repository per environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Each of these approaches has pros and cons. We propose the multi-directory approach. The pros of it are:
> a single repo and branch serving as the source of truth for all the environments, very easy template sharing and
> relatively easy way to compare and promote configuration across environments. On the other hand, it might not be the
> best solution for access control, template versioning and also easy comparing of environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each of these approaches has pros and cons. Giant Swarm relies on the multi-directory approach for multiple reasons. It is a single repo and single branch which serves as the source of truth for all the environments. Easy for template sharing and a relatively simple way to compare and promote configuration across environments. On the other hand, it needs extra work for access control management, template versioning or environment drift detection.
```

## Environments

We are creating a new `base` type called environment. Inside there will be two folders.

> The `stages` folder is how we propose to group environment specifications.
> There is a good reason for this additional layer of grouping. You can use this approach to have multiple
> different clusters - like the dev, staging, production - but also to have multiple different
> regions where you want to spin these clusters up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `stages` folder is how we propose to group environment specifications. There is a good reason for this additional layer. You can use it for hacing multiple different clusters - like the dev, staging and production - but also to have multiple different regions where you want to spin these clusters up.
```

The `regions` folder is how we propose to group specifications for configurations referred to different locations or regions in the different cloud providers or datacenters.

> Please note that if you want to use multiple environment templates to create a single cluster
that uses `App CR`s for deployments, like you would like to use `dev` out of `staging` layout to set app configuration
and then use `east` from the `data-centers` to set the IP ranges, you will run into issues around merging

> configurations, as currently one configuration source (i.e. `ConfigMap` in `spec.config.configMap`) completely

Reviewer: I dont get this block 😅

Author: rephrased to do it more explicit

overrides the whole value of the same attribute coming from the other base. We're working to remove this limitation.

In order to avoid config collisions, we are specifying different config changes in different environment folders. In our case:

> - `stages` should refer to versions of the cluster and apps running, and different configurations associated to the stage.
> - `regions` should contain configurations referred to locality, like netwroking or DNS zones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `stages` should refer to versions of the cluster and apps running, and different configurations associated to the stage.
- `regions` should contain configurations referred to the locality, like networking or DNS zones.
```

> We're assuming that all the clusters using this environments pattern should in many regards look the same
> across all the environments. Still, each environment layer introduces some key differences, like app version being deployed
> for `dev/staging/prod` environments or a specific IP range, availability zones, certificates or ingresses config
> for regions like `eu-central/us-west`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're assuming that all the clusters using this environments pattern should in many regards look the same
across all the environments. Still, each environment layer introduces some key differences, like the app version being deployed for `dev/staging/prod` environments or a specific IP range, availability zones, certificates or ingress config for regions like `eu-central/us-west`.
```

> To create an environment template, you need to make a  directory in `environments` that describes the best the
> differentiating factor for that kind of environment, then you should create sub folder there for different possible values.
> For example, for multiple regions, we recommend putting region specific configuration into
> `/bases/environments/regions` folder and under there create e.g. `eu_central`, `us_west` folders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create an environment template, you need to make a  directory in `environments` that describes the best the
differentiating factor for that kind of environment, then you should create a sub folder there for different possible values.

For example, for multiple regions, we recommend putting region-specific configurations into
`/bases/environments/regions` folder and under there create e.g. `eu_central`, and `us_west` folders.
```

Once your environment templates are ready, you can use them to create new clusters by placing cluster definitions
in `/management-clusters/MC_NAME/organizations/ORG_NAME/workload-clusters`

### Stages

Let's create 2 example type of clusters under `/bases/environments/stages`. Each of these contain a `example_cluster` folder with an example.

```nohighlight
mkdir -p bases/environments/stages/dev/example_cluster
mkdir -p bases/environments/stages/prod/example_cluster
```

> Inside each folder we will create a `kustomization.yaml` file. This file will reference an already existent `base` to get the cluster creation resources and then add some extra confiurations or resources that will conform the cluster template for the environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inside each folder, we will create a `kustomization.yaml` file. This file will reference an already existent `base` to get the cluster creation resources and then add some extra configurations or resources that will conform to the cluster template for the environment.
```

buildMetadata: [originAnnotations]
configMapGenerator:
  - files:
    - values=cluster_config.yaml
    name: ${cluster_name}-prod-config
    namespace: org-${organization}
  - files:
    - values=default_apps_config.yaml
    name: ${cluster_name}-default-apps-prod-config
    namespace: org-${organization}
generatorOptions:
  disableNameSuffixHash: true
kind: Kustomization
patches:
  - patch: |
      - type: merge
        op: add
        path: /spec/extraConfigs/0
        value:
          name: ${cluster_name}-prod-config
          namespace: org-${organization}
          priority: 110
    target:
      group: application.giantswarm.io
      kind: App
      name: ${cluster_name}
      namespace: org-\${organization}
  - patch: |
      - type: merge
        op: add
        path: /spec/extraConfigs/0
        value:
          name: ${cluster_name}-default-apps-prod-config
          namespace: org-${organization}
          priority: 110
    target:
      group: application.giantswarm.io
      kind: App
      name: ${cluster_name}-defaul-apps
      namespace: org-\${organization}
resources:
  - ../../../../../../../../bases/clusters/capa/v0.21.0/
```

> In this case we are setting the version of the base that we are using. See how to create versioned bases in the ["How to create bases" article](/advanced/gitops/bases/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, we are setting the version of the base that we are using. See how to create versioned bases in the ["How to create bases" article](/advanced/gitops/bases/).
```

> Now, we are creating a configuration file `cluster_config.yaml` with the values we are changing from the cluster base for production. We can configure a complete different value set, even override new configurations from default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, we are creating a configuration file `cluster_config.yaml` with the values we are changing from the cluster base for production. We can configure a completely different value set, even override new configurations from default.
```

```yaml
controlPlane:
  replicas: 3
machinePools:
- instanceType: m5.2xlarge
  maxSize: 10
  minSize: 5
  name: machine-prod-pool0
  rootVolumeSizeGB: 300
network:
  availabilityZoneUsageLimit: 3
```

> We want now to set an different version for some default apps installed in the cluster (for example, we want to use a known stable version). Like in dev environment, we create a file `default_apps_config.yaml` with the specific values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want now to set a different version for some default apps installed in the cluster (for example, we want to use a known stable version). Like in the dev environment, we create a file `default_apps_config.yaml` with the specific values.
```

```yaml
userConfig:
  apps:
    cilium:
      version: 0.6.0
    coreDNS:
      version: 1.12.0
```

It is similar to the development cluster in the following manners:

- We are using a base and modifying values with an overlay configuration.
- We can change values in the cluster config and in the default apps.

The final structure of our stages is:

```nohighlight
bases/environments/stages/
├── dev
│   └── example_cluster
│       ├── cluster_config.yaml
│       ├── default_apps_config.yaml
│       └── kustomization.yaml
└── prod
    └── example_cluster
        ├── cluster_config.yaml
        ├── default_apps_config.yaml
        └── kustomization.yaml
```

> > In a similar way, we can base our stages in different cluster templates that we create from bases. We can create as many levels as we want, always keeping in mind properly setting the priorities of the config files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
__Note__: In a similar way, we can base our stages on different cluster templates that we create from bases. We can create as many levels as we want, always keeping in mind properly setting the priorities of the config files.
```

```nohighlight
mkdir -p bases/environments/regions/eu_central
mkdir -p bases/environments/regions/us_west

cd bases/environments/regions
```

For the `eu-central` region, we are creating a `cluster_config.yaml` file and a `kustomization.yaml` file. 

`cluster_config.yaml`

```yaml
controlPlane:
  availabilityZones:
    - eu-central-1
    - eu-central-2
    - eu-central-3
nodeCIDR: "10.32.0.0/24"
```

> These values are examples and need to be replaced by real values of the user account.

`kustomization.yaml`

```yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
buildMetadata: [originAnnotations]
configMapGenerator:
  - files:
    - values=cluster_config.yaml
    name: ${cluster_name}-region-config
    namespace: org-${organization}
generatorOptions:
  disableNameSuffixHash: true
patches:
  - patch: |
      - op: add
        path: /spec/extraConfigs/0
        value:
          - name: "${cluster_name}-region-config"
            namespace: org-${organization}
            priority: 120
    target:
      group: application.giantswarm.io
      kind: App
      name: ${cluster_name}
      namespace: org-${organization}
kind: Kustomization
```

> With these files we are creating a new `configmap` and adding it as an extra config in the cluster app that will create the cluster resources.
> 
> Now, for the `us-west` region we create a `cluster_config.yaml` file with different configuration. We can copy the `kustomization.yaml` file from the other region as it will be the same.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With these files, we are creating a new `configmap` and adding it as an extra config in the cluster app that will create the cluster resources.

Now, for the `us-west` region we create a `cluster_config.yaml` file with a different configuration. We can copy the `kustomization.yaml` file from the other region as it will be the same.
```

Now, we are using the environments created as a base for a workload cluster. In order to create a workload cluster in our repository we run the command:

```nohighlight
kubectl gs gitops add workload-cluster \
--management-cluster MC_NAME \
--name WL_NAME \
--organization ORG_NAME \
--repository-name MC_NAME-git-repo \
--base bases/environments/stages/dev \
--cluster-release 0.21.0 \
--default-apps-release 0.15.0
```

In this case, we have specified to use the `dev` stage we just created as a base. This will generate all the folders and files needed to create the cluster with the default settings of that stage.

In order to include now the `region` setting, we need to edit the file `/management-clusters/MC_NAME/organizations/ORG_NAME/workload-clusters/WL_NAME/mapi/cluster/kustomization.yaml` and include:

```yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
commonLabels:
  giantswarm.io/managed-by: flux
kind: Kustomization
resources:
  - ../../../../../../../../bases/environments/stages/dev
# Include a new line with the resources that provide region configuration
  - ../../../../../../../../bases/environments/regions/eu-central
```

> > Note that we use the extra configs feature of App CR to patch in additional layers of configurations for out Application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
__Note__:  We use the extra configs feature of App CR to patch in additional layers of configurations for out Application.
```

You can read more about this feature [here](https://docs.giantswarm.io/app-platform/app-configuration/#extra-configs).

## Tips for developing environments

> For complex clusters, you can end up merging a lot of layers of templates and configurations. In order to keep sanity, it's very important to stablish a good priority system and respect it every time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For complex clusters, you can end up merging a lot of layers of templates and configurations. In order to keep sanity, it's very important to establish a good priority system and respect it every time.
```

For example, reserve priority values for different levels:

- 100 for cluster base
- 110 for environment stage
- 120 for environment region
- 130 for cluster config

> You can check the [gitops-template](https://github.com/giantswarm/gitops-template/tree/main/) repository that contains severa examples of cluster bases and configuration layers. Under `tools` folder in this repository you can find the `fake-flux-build` script that helps
> you render and inspect the final result. For more information check `tools/README.md`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can check the [gitops-template](https://github.com/giantswarm/gitops-template/tree/main/) repository that contains several examples of cluster bases and configuration layers. Under the `tools` folder in this repository you can find the `fake-flux-build` script that helps you render and inspect the final result. For more information check `tools/README.md`.
```
